docs(website): add Sigstore (keyless) signing tutorial (#2588)
open-component-model/open-component-model: website/content/docs/tutorials/signing/sigstore.md

description: "Sign and verify a component version with your OIDC identity — no key pair to generate, no public key to distribute."
icon: "🪪"
weight: 30
toc: true
hasMermaid: true
---

In this tutorial you'll sign a component version with [Sigstore](https://www.sigstore.dev/) and verify it again — without generating a key pair.
Your OIDC identity (Google, GitHub, or Microsoft) is what proves authorship, and a verifier only needs to know which identity to trust.

For the conceptual background — what Fulcio, Rekor, and TUF each do, and how identity-based trust differs from key pinning —
see [Concept: Sigstore (Keyless)]({{< relref "docs/concepts/signing-and-verification-concept.md#sigstore-keyless" >}})
and [Concept: Identity-Based Trust]({{< relref "docs/concepts/signing-and-verification-concept.md#identity-based-trust-sigstore" >}}).

## What You'll Learn

- Configure OCM to use your OIDC identity as a signing credential
- Sign a component version with `ocm sign cv` against public Sigstore
- Read the recorded identity out of a Sigstore signature
- Verify the signature by declaring whose identity you trust

**Estimated time:** ~10 minutes

## How It Works

> ```mermaid

Reviewer: this should be a bit more elaborate on the sign and verify side and talk to sigstore infra components in the diagram

Author: added sigstore infra components (since we use public sigstore I also added Dex)

{{< callout context="note" title="Spec and credential work as a pair" icon="outline/info-circle" >}}
The signer spec picks **how** to sign (which handler, which endpoints). The `.ocmconfig` consumer identity provides the credential **the handler asks for** (the OIDC token, in this case). Both must be present for signing to succeed — the spec on its own has no token, the credential on its own has no handler. Linking them is the consumer-identity `type` and `signature` fields.
{{< /callout >}}

{{< /step >}}

{{< step >}}

### Sign the component version

Run the sign command with both files:

```bash
ocm sign cv \
  --config ./.ocmconfig \
  --signer-spec ./sigstore-sign.yaml \
  ./transport-archive//github.com/acme.org/helloworld:1.0.0
```

A browser window opens against the public Sigstore login page (Dex). Pick your identity provider (Google, GitHub, or Microsoft), authenticate, and you'll see an OCM "Signing identity verified!" page. Return to the terminal — signing continues automatically.

> What just happened, in three sentences: OCM exchanged your OIDC token at Fulcio for a short-lived signing certificate (~10 minutes validity) bound to your email address. It hashed the component descriptor, signed the hash with the ephemeral key, and recorded the entry in the Rekor transparency log. The signature, the Fulcio certificate, and the Rekor inclusion proof are bundled into the component descriptor's `signatures` field as one self-contained blob.

Reviewer: this should be a numbered list probably

  value: 4e376182b3d535143e8e009b1e467df3a5b0c1f912c71ae432200654c355606f
name: default
signature:
  algorithm: sigstore
  issuer: https://accounts.google.com
  mediaType: application/vnd.dev.sigstore.bundle.v0.3+json
  value: eyJtZWRpYVR5cGUiOiJhcHBsaWNhdGlvbi92bmQuZGV2LnNpZ3N0b3JlLmJ1bmRsZS52MC4z...

time=2026-05-20T15:32:55.725+02:00 level=INFO msg="signed successfully" name=default digest=4e376182b3d535143e8e009b1e467df3a5b0c1f912c71ae432200654c355606f hashAlgorithm=SHA-256 normalisationAlgorithm=jsonNormalisation/v4alpha1
```

</details>

{{< /step >}}

{{< step >}}

### Inspect the signature

Before verifying, take a look at what was actually written to the component descriptor. This is where Sigstore's identity-based trust becomes concrete:

```bash
ocm get cv ./transport-archive//github.com/acme.org/helloworld:1.0.0 -o yaml \
  | yq '.[0].signatures[] | select(.signature.algorithm == "sigstore")'
```

You should see your signature with the recorded identity:

```yaml
name: default
digest:
  hashAlgorithm: SHA-256
  normalisationAlgorithm: jsonNormalisation/v4alpha1
  value: 4e376182b3d535143e8e009b1e467df3a5b0c1f912c71ae432200654c355606f
signature:
  algorithm: sigstore

>   issuer: https://accounts.google.com

Reviewer: we agreed to drop the issuer so this is either incorrect or outdated

Author: ah, ok. Right now it is still implemented using Fulcio cert's V1/V2 Sigstore extension OIDs as value. So, you would like to get it completely removed from the signature for algorithm: sigstore?

Author: [PR](https://github.com/open-component-model/open-component-model/pull/2790/) removes the issuer

  mediaType: application/vnd.dev.sigstore.bundle.v0.3+json

>   value: <base64-encoded Sigstore bundle>

Reviewer: we could add here how a sigstore bundle looks like by referencing the sigstore docs

Author: added a link to Sigstore protobuf bundle spec

{{< /step >}}

{{< step >}}

### Configure the verifier identity

Verification is "do I trust *this identity*?" — not "do I have *this public key*?" Tell OCM which identity you trust by writing a verifier spec.

Two values matter, both required:

- **`certificateIdentity`** — the email or workload identity of whoever signed (e.g. your own email, copied from the previous step's output)
- **`certificateOIDCIssuer`** — *which* OIDC provider they logged in with (different providers can have the same email)

Create `sigstore-verify.yaml`:

```bash
cat > sigstore-verify.yaml << 'EOF'
type: SigstoreVerificationConfiguration/v1alpha1
certificateOIDCIssuer: https://accounts.google.com
certificateIdentity: jane.doe@example.com
EOF
```

Replace `certificateIdentity` with the email you logged in with, and adjust `certificateOIDCIssuer` to match your provider:

| Signer logged in via | `certificateOIDCIssuer` value |
| --- | --- |
| Google | `https://accounts.google.com` |
| GitHub | `https://github.com/login/oauth` |
| Microsoft | `https://login.microsoftonline.com` |

{{< callout context="caution" title="The issuer is the upstream IdP, not Sigstore Dex" icon="outline/alert-triangle" >}}

> Public Sigstore uses Dex (`oauth2.sigstore.dev`) as a federation gateway, but the issuer recorded in your signing certificate is the **upstream identity provider** — the one in the table above. Don't put `oauth2.sigstore.dev` here.

Reviewer: this needs more explanation and needs to be decoupled explicitly from the OCM issuer concept

Author: tried to explain the to different, unrelated concepts

{{< /callout >}}

{{< /step >}}

{{< step >}}

### Verify the signature

> Run verify with the verifier spec:

Reviewer: i think verify should include a case for an identity expression

Author: I added the reg exp case in the section before where it is about the verifier-spec: https://deploy-preview-2588--ocm-website.netlify.app/docs/tutorials/signing/sigstore-keyless/#trust-a-pattern-of-identities-not-a-single-email

```bash
ocm verify cv \
  --verifier-spec ./sigstore-verify.yaml \
  ./transport-archive//github.com/acme.org/helloworld:1.0.0
```

<details>
<summary>Expected output</summary>

```text
time=2026-05-20T15:35:18.412+02:00 level=INFO msg="verifying signature" name=default

> time=2026-05-20T15:35:18.951+02:00 level=INFO msg="signature verification completed" name=default duration=539.512209ms

Reviewer: why is this not logging any sigstore interaction? IMHO we are missing log messages on sign / verify here

Author: handler logging done in  [PR 2801](https://github.com/open-component-model/open-component-model/pull/2801). In INFO level we just add one new line on verify, no new lines on sign.

```
level=INFO msg="sigstore verify: enforcing identity constraints" certificate_identity=... certificate_identity_regexp="" certificate_oidc_issuer=... certificate_oidc_issuer_regexp="" private_infrastructure=true|false trusted_root=...
```

Sign emits no new Info lines. The signature YAML already shows `algorithm: sigstore`, `issuer`, and the bundle.

The full verbose Cosign log is visible in log level DEBUG. I updated the snippet in the doc.

---
title: "Sigstore (Keyless)"
description: "Sign and verify a component version with your OIDC identity — no key pair to generate, no public key to distribute."

> icon: "🪪"

Reviewer 2: I think this icon is a noop because its not already included in the svg folder, so it falls back to the default 

<img width="236" height="301" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/51d0854b-8276-400a-af39-296d65bd35b4" />

Author: added a sigstore and some other icons and used them on the index page

3. The signed entry was recorded in the Rekor transparency log.
4. The signature, the Fulcio certificate, and the Rekor inclusion proof are bundled into the component descriptor's `signatures` field as one self-contained blob.

<details>
<summary>Expected output</summary>

```text
digest:
  hashAlgorithm: SHA-256
  normalisationAlgorithm: jsonNormalisation/v4alpha1
  value: 4e376182b3d535143e8e009b1e467df3a5b0c1f912c71ae432200654c355606f
name: default
signature:
  algorithm: sigstore
  mediaType: application/vnd.dev.sigstore.bundle.v0.3+json
  value: eyJtZWRpYVR5cGUiOiJhcHBsaWNhdGlvbi92bmQuZGV2LnNpZ3N0b3JlLmJ1bmRsZS52MC4z...

time=2026-05-20T15:32:55.725+02:00 level=INFO msg="signed successfully" name=default digest=4e376182b3d535143e8e009b1e467df3a5b0c1f912c71ae432200654c355606f hashAlgorithm=SHA-256 normalisationAlgorithm=jsonNormalisation/v4alpha1
```

</details>

{{< /step >}}

{{< step >}}

### Inspect the signature

Before verifying, take a look at what was actually written to the component descriptor. This is where Sigstore's identity-based trust becomes concrete:

```bash
ocm get cv ./transport-archive//github.com/acme.org/helloworld:1.0.0 -o yaml \

>   | yq '.[0].signatures[] | select(.signature.algorithm == "sigstore")'

Reviewer 2: `yq` and `jq` could be listed under optional prerequisites

Author: added

```

You should see your signature with the recorded identity:

```yaml
name: default
digest:
  hashAlgorithm: SHA-256
  normalisationAlgorithm: jsonNormalisation/v4alpha1
  value: 4e376182b3d535143e8e009b1e467df3a5b0c1f912c71ae432200654c355606f
signature:
  algorithm: sigstore
  mediaType: application/vnd.dev.sigstore.bundle.v0.3+json
  value: <base64-encoded Sigstore bundle>
```

The `value` field is the full Sigstore bundle — base64-encoded JSON containing three things in one self-contained blob: the **signature bytes**, the **Fulcio certificate** (your email is recorded as the certificate's Subject Alternative Name, and the OIDC issuer URL is recorded as a certificate extension), and the **Rekor inclusion proof**. All three travel with the component descriptor; nothing needs to be fetched at verify time.

> The exact bundle layout is defined by the [Sigstore protobuf bundle spec](https://github.com/sigstore/protobuf-specs/blob/main/protos/sigstore_bundle.proto) — see the upstream [Sigstore documentation](https://docs.sigstore.dev/) for the full schema. To inspect a specific bundle, decode the `value` field with `base64 -d` and pipe it through `jq`.

Reviewer 2: Filename might shift on main, linking it via the tag makes the link more future proof

```suggestion
The exact bundle layout is defined by the [Sigstore protobuf bundle spec](https://github.com/sigstore/protobuf-specs/blob/v0.5.1/protos/sigstore_bundle.proto) — see the upstream [Sigstore documentation](https://docs.sigstore.dev/) for the full schema. To inspect a specific bundle, decode the `value` field with `base64 -d` and pipe it through `jq`.
```

Author: my intention was exactly that it always points to the newest version. If the bundle would change, our current implementation would package that new bundle, as (if not already on the PATH) we pull the latest cosign CLI for the signing.

> The exact bundle layout is defined by the [Sigstore protobuf bundle spec](https://github.com/sigstore/protobuf-specs/blob/main/protos/sigstore_bundle.proto) — see the upstream [Sigstore documentation](https://docs.sigstore.dev/) for the full schema. To inspect a specific bundle, decode the `value` field with `base64 -d` and pipe it through `jq`.

Reviewer 2: Everything else is nicely copy-paste-able, so maybe this part can be too
```suggestion
The exact bundle layout is defined by the [Sigstore protobuf bundle spec](https://github.com/sigstore/protobuf-specs/blob/main/protos/sigstore_bundle.proto) — see the upstream [Sigstore documentation](https://docs.sigstore.dev/) for the full schema. To inspect a specific bundle, decode the `value` field with `base64 -d` and pipe it through `jq`, e.g. by appending `| yq '.signature.value' | base64 -d | jq` to the previous command.
```
